# Enabling collaboration in the humanitarian sector with open data
According to the Centre for Humdata, the [demand for humanitarian data reached a record level in 2023](https://centre.humdata.org/the-state-of-open-humanitarian-data-2024/), due to the effects of climate shocks, food insecurity, war, disease and food security around the world.  

The use of data to support humanitarian crises is not new, but it is a field which has been rapidly evolving over the past 20 years. Access to contextual data about countries, data about crises as they happen and the response of humanitarian action have increased, and there are a network of organisations who have been collecting this data. However, it has often been siloed, making it difficult to paint a clear picture of a crisis and therefore more difficult to respond effectively. 

The sharing of data has [enabled humanitarian actors](https://pacscenter.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/humanitarian_data_ecosystem.pdf) to become more efficient and effective with less funds, while facing more crises. The [Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX)](https://data.humdata.org/) is one platform which supports data sharing in the humanitarian sector, by acting as a convener for trusted parties to share data about crises as they happen.

## Enabling collaboration in the humanitarian sector
HDX is managed by [OCHA's Centre for Humanitarian Data](https://centre.humdata.org/), which is located in The Hague, the Netherlands. OCHA is part of the United Nations Secretariat and is responsible for bringing together humanitarian actors to ensure a coherent response to emergencies. HDX was launched in July 2014, with the goal of making humanitarian data easy to find and use for tackling humanitarian crises. 

HDX hosts nearly 20,000 datasets about 254 locations from more than 2,065 sources. The platform has a series of partner organisations sharing data, including humanitarian organisations like the World Food Programme, Multinational organisations like the World Bank Group, civil society groups like OpenStreetMap, as well as tech companies like the Data for Good programme at Meta. The datasets have been downloaded over 2.7 million times by 1.4 million users. Data from HDX has been used to share open source maps which have been used to provide aid response to the [earthquake in Syria and Turkey](https://opensource.com/article/23/3/open-source-open-data-humanitarian-response), to forecast floods in  

Sharing data via the HDX platform has had a big impact on the humanitarian sector as a whole, and has revamped how data is shared to support decision making around crises:

* **Enabling coherent messages**: Data published on HDX enables the stakeholders involved in tackling a crisis, from humanitarian organisations, to journalists, to get on the same page with a single source of truth. The platform publishes data from over 200 organisations who are experts in their respective fields, for example UNFPA is the go to for up to data population data. HDX ensures that the right organisations are at the table sharing data. Due to the nature of crises, there are times where data can be contested. Sometimes numbers on the HDX platform posted by two organisations will be different, HDX does not choose which is right or wrong but rather platform both datasets for experts to use as they wish.
* **Increasing access to data**: Before HDX existed, humanitarian data was siloed across the huge diversity of stakeholders in the field. Accessing data required a strong knowledge of the organisations in the field, and connections to those organisations to ask for access. This meant lots of people didn’t know that data existed, the sector has seen huge added value from bringing all of that data together in one place for everyone to access. It is also more cost effective for the respective organisations, rather than running their own platforms, and they achieve better reach when publishing on HDX. 
* **Building trust**: While HDX does not validate every dataset on the platform, it does perform some checks for example to scan for personal data. It rather prioritises only inviting trusted organisations to publish data on the platform, meaning that those who do publish data gain legitimacy from publishing on the platform. Lastly, OCHA, who steward HDX, have a rich expertise in responsible data practices, and are therefore able to support many of the members to share and use data in a responsible way.

## About the data
The data on the HDX platform includes datasets from back in January 2008 to much more current data about crises happening right now. Across the 19,000 datasets hosted on HDX there are three main types of dataset:
Baseline data, this data provides the context of different countries to support responses to crises. It covers common reference information like the name of districts or cities (which may vary across languages).
Situational data, this data is specific to particular crises. It includes information about the people affected and their needs. 
Response data, this data covers how different organisations are responding to each crisis to support coordination across stakeholders.

Publishers on HDX can share their datasets with one of those recommended [by HDX themselves](https://data.humdata.org/faqs/licenses). This selection includes some Creative Commons licences, some Open Data Commons licences, and the Open Database License. Notably, HDX allows the use of the [Creative Commons Attribution for Intergovernmental Organisations](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/deed.en), a licence designed with [explicit conditions that suit organisational publishers](https://wiki.creativecommons.org/wiki/Intergovernmental_Organizations) like those on HDX.

## Looking forward
HDX data has already changed how the humanitarian sector responds to crises. Looking forward, HDX is seeking to expand that impact, by curating new data sources and types and by thinking about how the data can be used to make predictions. For example, satellite data has long been available, but not always accessible or actionable, rainfall data suffers from similar challenges. There are many new data sources which can support humanitarian actors. 

Secondly, there is a desire to enable more people to access and use data on the platform. HDX is exploring how generative AI can support people to access and use data, in a safe and trustworthy way. They want humanitarian actors across the ecosystem to be able to use the data on HDX, to inform their decision making and to ultimately support more people suffering from crises around the world.