# Open Data Holds Corporations Accountable on Sustainability Goals
In 2015, the UN General Assembly adopted the [2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development](https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld), with [17 Sustainable Development Goals](https://sdgs.un.org/goals) at its core. These goals cover various different themes, including water, energy, climate, oceans, urbanisation, transport, science and technology, and each one includes a series of sub-targets. The goals propose a blueprint for a prosperous planet, with people at the centre of its future. They aim to end poverty and other deprivations, recognising the need for strategies that simultaneously improve health and education, reduce inequality, and spur economic growth, alongside protecting the planet by tackling the climate crisis. 

Achieving these goals requires collaboration from many different stakeholders, including governments, civil society, the private sector, individuals and communities. These efforts need the necessary support, resources, innovative thinking and partnerships to collectively achieve these goals. 

In this context, the private sector is a crucial part of achieving the SDGs. The private sector has huge potential to affect change \- it often accounts for the [majority of jobs in a country, and attract significant amounts of foreign capital investment](https://opecfund.org/news/how-the-private-sector-can-advance-development). Innovation, emerging from the private sector in collaboration with other stakeholders, is a prerequisite for achieving the ambitious sustainable development goals. 

However, to boost companies’ motivation to take up this challenge, there needs to be a change in the way that their impact on the SDGs is measured.

## Openly benchmarking companies role in achieving the SDGs  
The World Benchmarking Alliance (WBA) was launched in 2018 to change the way that business impact is measured, with the aim of stimulating action to build a sustainable future for everyone. WBA is a global nonprofit on a mission to measure how business impacts people and the planet to collaboratively strengthen corporate accountability for sustainable development. It publishes free and publicly available research on company performance on sustainable development. It also assesses, benchmarks and engages with 2,000 companies worldwide across seven system transformations: digital, food and agriculture, nature and biodiversity, decarbonisation and energy, finance, social, and urban. It collaborates with more than 400 allies worldwide to facilitate the use of its research insights for stakeholder action.   

WBA’s benchmarks enable a variety of actors, including governments, investors, civil society, individuals, and companies, to better understand and compare the performance of companies against each other. This benchmarking enables better decision-making regarding who to partner with, which policies to develop, and where to spend funds. 

These benchmarks have already begun to create change in the private sector ecosystem. There is now a strong element of competition, with companies keen to ensure they are not left behind by their peers. There have additionally been direct changes to companies, for example with compensation packages for senior team members including requirements to meet certain benchmarks. Beyond the companies themselves, there has been significant impact since WBA’s inception in 2018:

* NGOs are [using WBA data to support their missions](https://www.worldbenchmarkingalliance.org/impact/how-wba-benchmarks-are-being-used-as-independent-monitoring-tools-by-civil-society/). In one example, ClientEarth references WBAs Oil and Gas methodology in its legal challenge against Shell's Board of Directors for failing to move away quickly enough from fossil fuels. Meanwhile, Save the Children is using the Food and Agriculture benchmark to assess which companies it feels comfortable working with.   
* Financial institutions are using WBA data to [assess investments](https://www.worldbenchmarkingalliance.org/impact/investors-are-using-our-benchmarks-to-hold-companies-to-account-for-their-impacts/), with more than 300 investors using it to inform their investment decisions in 2023\. 

## Summary about the dataset  
The WBA collects and publishes data about 2,000 companies worldwide, across seven key metrics. Benchmark methodologies translate societal expectations into metrics, providing companies with a clear path forward. Benchmarks and league tables in turn show where industries and individual companies stand in their journey towards a more sustainable future.

The [benchmarks are specifically created](https://www.worldbenchmarkingalliance.org/benchmarking/) depending on the thematic area and are designed and developed by the WBA team, with support from an Expert Review Committee and public consultation. The benchmarks are then shared with the relevant companies to populate via disclosure, alongside the publicly available information already available online (for example, via trusted sources such as the UN or Climate Trace). Using a disclosure methodology enables access to data that otherwise may not be freely available online, and WBA has found that as increasing numbers of companies disclose, the methodology encourages even more disclosure. Finally, the data and benchmarks are verified and analysed by the WBA team before being published openly, under a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.en), for everyone to access, use and share. 

## Looking forward   
Openness will remain at the heart of the work of the WBA. This will involve the development of better open data infrastructure, including how data is shared (for example, via a portal and through the development of APIs) and standardisation across benchmarks (as well as with outside data sources). The commitment to openness speaks to the WBA’s desire to ensure that data is universally available.

There is also an appetite to explore the possibility of improving processes through the use of AI. While assessment of benchmarks is a highly nuanced process, requiring human judgement, there are opportunities to increase efficiency. Similarly, AI search is an option to support those who want to explore the data shared by WBA. Enabling more people to access and use WBA data supports the mission to achieve the SDGs. s