# GitHub Data Exposes Global Patterns in AI and Technology Innovation

[GitHub](https://github.com/) is an online platform that allows programmers to create, store, manage and share their code publicly. As of January 2024, it had [more than 150 million users](https://github.blog/news-insights/product-news/github-copilot-in-vscode-free/) globally and is now ubiquitous in the field of open source collaborative programming: almost anyone looking to start a project and share their code with others will turn to GitHub to host their work. 

While GitHub offers private code storage, many developers opt to share their code publicly. With developers’ code from all over the world hosted publicly, GitHub can act as a central source of information regarding technology research and development. This has proven useful for training AI models for coding. For example, the models that power [GitHub Copilot](https://github.com/features/copilot), one of the first AI-powered programming assistants for developers, were trained on natural language text and source code from publicly-available sources, including code in public repositories on GitHub. GitHub Copilot was groundbreaking, and was found [not only to increase productivity of users, but also increase their job satisfaction and wellbeing](https://github.blog/news-insights/research/research-quantifying-github-copilots-impact-on-developer-productivity-and-happiness/).

However, GitHub data can be used for much more. Each repository on the platform (and each piece of code within it) also has attached metadata: labels, either automatically generated or written by the developer themselves, that provide information about who contributed to the code, what it aims to do, what language it is written in, what technological topic it falls under, and more. This metadata is rich and can be used to build an understanding of what developers on GitHub are doing, reflecting current technological trends.

## Using innovation data to analyse innovation and AI
GitHub aggregates metadata about repositories, developers, organisations, and software development activity on GitHub into an open data offering: the [GitHub Innovation Graph](https://innovationgraph.github.com/). The Innovation Graph provides quarterly releases of indicators measured from the aggregation of GitHub metadata. This includes data on the amount of developer contributions each quarter, either globally or per country and economic bloc, as well as statistics for the licences and programming languages used by these developers and the technological categories to which their contributions belong.

Released in 2023, the Innovation Graph was a collaborative effort between teams in [GitHub and partners in civil society](https://socialimpact.github.com/assets/img/research/GitHub_StandardizedMetrics.pdf) to ensure the open data released was truly useful. The Innovation Graph has enabled commercial, academic and governmental research on global innovation, especially in the context of AI.

GitHub has worked with Harvard Business School to [measure the impact of generative AI on how open source maintainers work](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=5007084). Innovation Graph data helped inform the research’s direction by giving a sense of the scale of public repositories, developers, and popular programming languages. By employing statistical methods on GitHub data, the research team found that after the deployment of GitHub Copilot, open source maintainers from around the world are doing proportionally more work on the core task of producing code, which AI assistants can help with, rather than project management activities. Furthermore, the results suggest that the release of generative AI code assistants enabled programmers to start being more explorative in their coding activities. This was most evident among developers with relatively low technical ability. 

Two economics researchers similarly used Innovation Graph open data to [estimate the impact of ChatGPT at a global scale](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11046). Hypothesising that ChatGPT enhanced productivity and overall efficiency in software development, the researchers used time series analysis methods to compare countries in which ChatGPT has been banned to countries where it is unrestricted. This comparison yielded strong results, suggesting that unrestricted access to ChatGPT in a country is significantly associated with more code being uploaded to GitHub from that country and, interestingly, a growth in software developers per capita. 

Innovation Graph data can also be used in policy discussions. The Economist has reported on [the potential policy implications on developer populations](https://www.economist.com/business/2024/09/29/ai-and-globalisation-are-shaking-up-software-developers-world), and [other research](https://jeffgortmaker.com/files/Open_Source_Software_Policy_in_Industry_Equilibrium.pdf) has used the Innovation Graph as the basis of analysis of China’s potentially tightening internet restrictions on its future domestic innovation and software development. Each of these pieces represents the interests of software developers and demonstrates the overall dynamics of technological innovation to policymakers. 

## About the data
Innovation Graph data is entirely kept in [accessible .csv files on its own GitHub repository](https://github.com/github/innovationgraph). This means that anyone, regardless of their technical knowledge and experience with the Git ecosystem, can download the data and use it for analysis. Also, the data is released under a [Creative Commons CC0 Public Domain Dedication](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/deed.en), which means that GitHub opts out of all copyright ownership of the data, thereby ensuring it has the widest possible reach. 

In the initial design phase, the GitHub team wanted to ensure that they honoured their commitment to the privacy of their user base. By only sharing public data, always publishing data with a delay, only ever publishing aggregates of data, and never publishing data for countries with fewer than 100 developers, the team ensures that the data preserves anonymity and mitigates the risk of re-identification of individuals in the dataset.

## Looking forward   
While the Innovation Graph team continues to update and release data, they are looking to expand their metrics and analyses to better demonstrate economic impacts of technology development and innovation. The data will be particularly useful for policymakers and economists looking to understand technology innovations, and what they mean for the global economy. 

Also, the team is in the process of designing an update to the way they classify repositories as AI-related, hoping to be able to better capture the landscape of AI projects published and updated on GitHub. This work might involve [using previous research](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/2020/05/gonzalez-msr-2020.pdf) but with updated methodologies to reflect the ever-changing vernacular in the field of AI.