# Transforming NHS Prescription Data into Public Health Intelligence 

The National Health Service (NHS) is the public healthcare system in the UK. It is available to all 60 million residents of the country for free at the point of use, funded by taxpayers and operating on an [annual budget of roughly £180 billion](https://www.nhsconfed.org/publications/autumn-budget-2024-what-you-need-know#:~:text=The%20Chancellor%20announced%20a%20%C2%A3,year%20to%20%C2%A3192%20billion.) in the 2023/24 financial year.  

Acting as the primary carer for all UK citizens, the NHS comes under intense stress due to its [limited resources, staff shortages, and the country’s ageing population](https://www.bma.org.uk/advice-and-support/nhs-delivery-and-workforce/pressures/an-nhs-under-pressure). There are continual efforts to explore and implement [cost savings across the NHS](https://www.england.nhs.uk/blog/changing-the-way-we-work-to-find-efficiencies-and-ensure-value-for-money-for-the-nhs/) to improve the efficiency and overall delivery of healthcare in the UK. These opportunities can arise in a variety of healthcare domains, and one example is in the prescription of medicines to patients. Medical professionals have an array of options when it comes to medication they can prescribe, each at varying levels of cost to the NHS \- how much money could the NHS, and individual practices within it, save by optimising their prescriptions?

To answer this question, [OpenPrescribing](https://openprescribing.net/) was developed in 2015 by the [Bennett Institute for Applied Data Science](https://www.bennett.ox.ac.uk/) as an online platform that facilitates the analysis of prescription trends, enabling healthcare facilities to compare their prescribing patterns against their peers and national averages to help them understand where they could potentially save money. The website provides interactive visualisations and presents users with clear statistics and even estimates of the theoretical savings that could be made. It also provides [aggregations for the entirety of England](https://openprescribing.net/national/england/), estimating that in September 2024 alone, if all practices had prescribed at least as efficiently as the national median, the NHS could have saved £2,543,000 on prescriptions. 

With evidence from OpenPrescribing, medical professionals at individual practices across England and the decision-makers within the NHS can make informed choices that benefit the overall efficiency of the NHS. At its core, this is entirely enabled by the open publishing of the [English Prescribing Dataset (EPD)](https://opendata.nhsbsa.net/dataset/english-prescribing-data-epd), one of the many open data offerings of the [NHS Business Services Authority (NHSBSA) Open Data Portal](https://opendata.nhsbsa.net/#home-page).  

## Publishing open data to maximise benefit to the NHS
Whilst the NHSBSA Open Data Portal was initially intended for the purpose of sharing pharmacy data, it has since been expanded to incorporate other areas of healthcare and useful management information. The Open Data Portal now offers NHS management and commercial activity data, ophthalmic services data, procurement data, and organisational standards and KPIs. This data supports both internal NHS analysts and external researchers to explore and analyse NHS operations, helping to identify opportunities for enhanced efficiency and improved decision-making.  

OpenPrescribing works to take open data from the NHSBSA and transform it to better support the needs of the healthcare system. As an organisation that is external to the NHS, it uses the NHSBSA’s prescribing data to visualise and determine trends in prescriptions and the money being spent on them to detect cost-saving opportunities and improve the efficiency of healthcare. With easy-to-interpret visualisations and aggregated statistics, OpenPrescribing has maximal impact: NHS General Practitioner surgeries that used its tools [were found to have saved £243,000](https://www.phc.ox.ac.uk/about/impact/openprescribing-putting-data-and-statistics-into-action-to-save-the-nhs-money).

External researchers and journalists also use NHSBSA data to get the insights they need on NHS operations without having to use Freedom of Information requests (FOIs), which are time-consuming for the NHS to respond to. Since the release of the Open Data Portal, the NHSBSA found they received far fewer FOIs, meaning the open data initiative increased their efficiency and made it easier for the NHS to be held accountable by external parties.  

Finally, internal analysts at the NHS are beginning to use the portal as a central source of data, incorporating it into reports and applying statistical methods to build evidence and inform decision-making on the present and future of the NHS.

## About the open data 
The NHSBSA Open Data Portal hosts 26 large scale datasets, each of which is licensed with the [Open Government Licence (OGL)](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/) and is therefore open to researchers worldwide. Each dataset is an aggregation of data collected from individual NHS regional offices across the UK, cleaned and standardised by bespoke automatic processing methods developed by the NHSBSA Open Data Portal team. Additional datasets are in development, contributing to a growing collection of valuable information to support research and innovation.

The English Prescribing Data (EPD), the main offering of the Open Data Portal, was accessed by at least 380,000 unique users in September 2024 alone. In its entirety, the dataset provides information on the monthly prescriptions issued by each prescribing organisation in England and contains granular detail on their quantities and costs. Researchers can use the data to compare the prescribing patterns of different NHS practices, different regions in England, and different medications, to identify where optimisations can be made and costs can be minimised. 

## Looking forward
As the NHSBSA Open Data Portal is continuously evolving to enhance its functionality and user experience, its potential use cases are still developing. Having recognised that a core strength of OpenPrescribing is the automatic visualisation of data alongside the presentation of key statistics and estimates, the NHSBSA data portal team are exploring their abilities to do the same and thereby improve accessibility to their data. This would allow users to get the insights they need from each of the NHSBSA’s datasets without having to download numerical datasets and perform their own analyses.

These plans to enhance accessibility of NHSBSA data might involve the use of AI: the NHS is keen to explore cases where Large Language Models (LLMs) can support analysis and decision-making in non-clinical, organisational settings. The NHSBSA is therefore exploring how to act as a central source of information for NHS administrative AI, perhaps by making their open data portal interactive with an LLM agent to make it more accessible to people with less technical skillsets.

Ultimately, OpenPrescribing is just one way that a NHSBSA Open Data Portal dataset can be used to analyse and improve the NHS. As the open data initiative continues to evolve, researchers and practitioners will have more opportunities to use data and identify potential efficiencies in the healthcare system.