# Powering Rural Uganda Through Open Data-Driven Electrification
Uganda, a landlocked country in East Africa, has a population of approximately 50 million people. For those living in urban areas, the [electrification rate](https://www.se4all-africa.org/seforall-in-africa/country-data/uganda/) is around 60%, while rural regions, though increasing, lag behind at 18%. This disparity poses a major barrier to economic development and poverty reduction. 

Uganda has a goal of more than 99% of the population having access to electricity by 2030, with 90% of that energy coming from renewable sources. Uganda is endowed with great renewable energy potential, as it is able to generate power from solar, hydro, biomass and wind. Since many rural areas are too far away from the current grid infrastructure, exploring alternative energy sources is a crucial step. 

## Sunbird AI partners with the Ugandan government and GIZ
Over the past two years, [Sunbird AI](https://sunbird.ai/) has been working with the German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ) and Uganda’s Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (MEMD) in implementing the National Electrification Strategy (NES) [to electrify 10 million households by 2030 by using open data](https://sunbird.ai/portfolio/green-mini-grid-site-identification/). 

Sunbird AI is a nonprofit organisation based in Uganda that develops artificial intelligence (AI) systems for social impact in Africa. It aims to help social initiatives, public institutions, and policymakers develop new AI technology for their own needs. Sunbird AI has a strong culture of collaboration and teamwork, and is committed to open source and open research, so that others can build on its work. Some example projects include work to [reduce noise pollution by building a map of noise data](https://sunbird.ai/portfolio/environmental-sensing/), and another to build and [develop text and speech language datasets](https://sunbird.ai/portfolio/african-languages/) for the six different languages spoken in Uganda, to support the development of technology that can be used by the whole country. 

## Electrification strategy in Lamwo District
In [one project](https://sunbird.ai/portfolio/green-mini-grid-site-identification/), Sunbird AI focused on the Lamwo district in northern Uganda on the border with South Sudan. As Lamwo is some distance from the national grid, alternative energy sources are required to electrify this region. To support decision-making on which types to use, Sunbird AI developed [a tool to identify the optimal sites for the government to build mini-grids](https://sunbird.ai/portfolio/green-mini-grid-site-identification/), and to support the wider electrification of rural areas. 

Sunbird AI [used machine learning](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQPJM6l0Y-22G6dEsIYnE8_AKL5F2EGcyZKtv25EupmN6P20DyhAxFfBIWv2lx1DAjEd7-GwUp6C-fI/pub) to automate the identification of optimal electrification strategies. They use a number of open data sets, including [the open buildings dataset](https://sites.research.google/gr/open-buildings/), population data, and Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), as well as several MEMD datasets. 

The tool seeks first to understand the different settlements in Lamwo. Information concerning precise details about a village, such as the number of buildings and their density, is key for selecting where to place a mini-grid. The tool further brings in demand- and supply-side electrification data, and can forecast potential expansion or reduction of buildings and settlements, to assess energy needs. 

The tool takes the form of a colour-coded map of different towns, based on the most optimal electrification strategy across the different options including solar, biomass, wind, and more. The map shows the density of buildings, their size, and their proximity to other electrification options, such as hydroelectric power, and provides an assessment of the most optimal electrification strategy for each town. For example, in one part of Lamwo that houses a protected bioreserve, certain strategies like biomass are classed as unsuitable. 

Across Lamwo, the tool has helped the local government to identify the right strategy for each village. For most of Lamwo, the most suitable options are installing home solar panel systems or extending the existing grid. MEMD is using these results to support the electrification of Lamwo in the most optimal way. This project supports Uganda's aim to ensure 99% of the population has access to electricity by 2030, while supporting people’s livelihoods. 

## About the data
Sunbird AI’s tool seeks to determine the best electrification strategy for individual villages in Lamwo from relevant GIS layers. 

Sunbird AI analyzed several GIS datasets and derivative data from satellite imagery processed through machine learning algorithms like the open buildings dataset. Other data incorporated into the tool includes population data, topography data, wind data, solar PV potential, river data, NDVI, and more. Sunbird has made many of the datasets available for further download via its [GitHub](https://github.com/SunbirdAI/lamwo-electrification-project/tree/main/datasets). These datasets are released under the GNU General Public License v3.0 licence, which enables their use and modification as long as Sunbird are attributed. 

## Looking forward 
The work focusing on the Lamwo district is only the start of this project. Sunbird’s AI team will be working to expand the model across Uganda, enabling its mission of electrifying 10 million households by 2030. The organisation has curated a rich dataset about Uganda's villages, climate and landscape, which it will use to explore developing other predictive models using the data. 

This pattern is common across Sunbird AI projects. It wants to continue to work on new, applied projects to realise the value of open data for new use cases and contexts, and to improve and extend existing projects into new locations. The organisation will continue to stick to its core value of collaboration, and hopes to extend its range of partners in the future. Sunbird AI is working on a variety of projects with a variety of partners and datasets for social impact in Uganda and beyond. 
