# Water Industry Data Sharing Unlocks Cross-Sector Business Value
It is [a pivotal moment](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c0qdev4vyl5o) for the UK water industry. Public scrutiny of the industry has never been higher and with an increasingly volatile climate, the challenges faced by water and wastewater companies are getting tougher. Rising temperatures make it harder to manage water consumption, environmental incidents are more unpredictable, and floods are more frequent and severe. As we face the climate emergency, this situation will get more complex - and these challenges don’t stop at water company boundaries.

Water data is part of solving this puzzle. Open data in the water industry has the potential to improve water quality, sustainability, and customer outcomes. Water companies, regulators, and government departments collect a wealth of data and information relating to water and wastewater services, as well as biodiversity and ecological data, that could provide insights into their effects on communities and the wider environment. This data could help improve performance in the here and now, as well as support planning for the future.

In 2023, Ofwat, the water regulator in the UK, published a report titled ‘Open data in the water industry: making the change’, which [called on all water companies to take immediate action](https://www.ofwat.gov.uk/ofwat-calls-on-water-companies-to-act-now-on-open-data/) to unleash the benefits of open data. Stream is a key part of the solution, and brings together 16 UK water companies to work together to publish data openly.
 
Stream is working to stimulate innovation and collaboration through open and shared data. Stream is a unique example of collaboration and open sharing of data across a semi- competitive, regulated industry to the benefit of both the companies themselves, as well as society and the environment. Throughout the design process, as well as part of each dataset launch, a highly collaborative process is followed. Stream members all have an opportunity to contribute to the publication of relevant data and a range of external stakeholders (relevant to each specific use case) are also involved. This process can take time, particularly when it comes to designing [specific standards](https://github.com/icebreakerone/stream-data-standards/blob/working/docs/README.md). However, it has significantly increased buy-in from the partner organisations andwider engagement from the data ecosystem.

## Publishing data openly across companies
The members of Stream have a vision to unlock the potential of water data to benefit customers, society, and the environment, and to use data to address key water sector challenges. Stream is a collaboration between the majority of UK water companies, supported by industry and civil society partners, Costain, Icebreaker One, Pinsent Masons, the ODI, Aiimi, Esri, Cosan Croga and Sia Partners. The project is part funded by the [Water Breakthrough Challenge](https://waterinnovation.challenges.org/), an innovation competition run by Ofwat. 

The Stream platform is designed to offer clear and easy access to water-related data for a range of uses, such as research, decision-making, and raising public awareness. Particular challenges that Stream data supports to tackle include preventing environmental incidents, reducing absolute carbon emissions associated with water extraction, use and treatment, and bringing down the cost of water, particularly for the most vulnerable customers. So far, the data has been used by a variety of different stakeholders, including academics and community and interest groups. 

While each company chooses what data to share, working as a collaborative has provided an important support network for water company members, who have been able to guide each other through the process, thereby enabling the whole sector to move together faster. For smaller companies, being part of Stream has helped to improve their data maturity, and to publish data that they may not have otherwise been able to share. The initiative has also significantly increased the amount of open data publishing in the water sector, increasing exposure for many members to reach wider networks.

## About the open data
What began with datasets on water quality has expanded rapidly. There are currently 87 datasets hosted on the [Stream open data portal](https://www.streamwaterdata.co.uk/search?collection=dataset), ranging from new datasets on [storm overflow activity](https://www.streamwaterdata.co.uk/pages/the-national-storm-overflow-hub) to domestic water consumption and raw water reservoir levels. The datasets are individual to each water company, while maintaining standards across the datasets. This enables both a localised view and the ability to compare across locations and companies. One of the most popular datasets is a foundational geospatial dataset depicting each water company's boundaries, created as a composite of data from each company. 

One particular challenge that Stream faces is AI readiness. Though not originally considered when releasing the data, one core benefit of open data is that you don’t know how others will make use of it. There is work to be done to ensure that data is AI-ready and that any risks associated with AI are managed, to enable additional benefits of opening up water data to be realised for the industry, society and the environment while continuing to maintain responsible data stewardship. 

## Looking forward
The data currently being shared on Stream is just the start. There is significant appetite from Stream to continue to offer more, and to explore how and where the data could be combined with other sources. For example, curating data that can provide insights into how different aspects of the water ecosystem, such as microplastics and forever chemicals, impact the environment. 

For water companies, being part of Stream has multiple benefits. Stream is more than a platform to open and share data, it’s the infrastructure that enables the industry to do so effectively and efficiently. Stream members work together to share experiences and learnings, explore common challenges and identify solutions, and champion the use of data to drive innovation and positive change.

They are working with a broad ecosystem of stakeholders – academia, researchers, regulators, citizen scientists, tech experts, community groups, and more – to maximise the benefits that open data can bring

The initiative will continue to focus on its core goal of collaboration and connecting people with a common cause. Complex problems in today's world require multi-stakeholder solutions, and bringing people together around data is one way that Stream will continue to support people and the planet.
