# Open Data Breaks Down Barriers for People with Blindness

Across the world, [338 million people](https://www.iapb.org/learn/vision-atlas/magnitude-and-projections/global/) were living with moderate to severe visual impairment or full blindness in 2020\. Despite global advancements in accessibility and the proliferation of support for the visually impaired (like [Braille](https://brailleworks.com/braille-resources/history-of-braille/) and [purpose-built text-to-speech tools](https://nfb.org/programs-services/knfb-reader)), safely navigating roadways and public transport on the way to their destination presents its own set of challenges. Many of those living with blindness rely on support to guide them to their destination. 

Understandably, many people living with blindness find this reliance difficult, as it can limit their desire to get outside and explore the world, often to the detriment of their physical health and mental wellbeing. To combat this problem, [BlindSquare](https://www.blindsquare.com/) empowers people with visual impairments to navigate the world by themselves by providing voiced narration about their surroundings via a GPS app. The app gives users accessible travel information alongside details on possible obstacles and points of interest, therefore working as an all-inclusive assistant. It operates in 195 countries for thousands of users, while the organisation behind it constantly updates its offerings to meet the needs of people with disabilities. 

BlindSquare was built in 2012 in Finland, and has remained a small organisation since. Beyond the app, the team has worked with both businesses and nonprofits to make the world a more accessible place for people living with blindness. To do so, BlindSquare bases all of its products on open and publicly available data.

## Using data to help blind people navigate
A visually impaired user of the BlindSquare app can communicate their chosen destination by using their smartphone's accessibility features, for example via speaking or a connected Bluetooth braille device. This works in collaboration with other apps, for example Google Maps, to map a route from A to B. Then, as the user embarks on this route, the app uses the smartphone’s GPS location to notify the user about the roads and crossings in front of them as well as the shops and restaurants they walk past, using freely available or low-cost text-to-speech tools to deliver this information in audio format. If the user requires public transport, the app also lets them know about the timetable for the bus or train they need to take as they arrive at a station, even working underground for those using the metro or subway. 

Users don’t need a planned destination in mind to use BlindSquare; wherever they are, they can activate the app simply by shaking their phone, triggering it to provide audio information about the user’s surroundings based on their location. The BlindSquare works with museums, galleries and other private locations to curate information about these buildings, for example including additional information about exhibitions as you walk around a museum. With all of this functionality, BlindSquare enables users with visual impairments to be independent and enjoy being outside of their homes while remaining safe and aware of their environment. 

## About the data
The information that BlindSquare provides to its users is entirely generated from open data. In its early stages, BlindSquare’s development massively benefited from Finland’s well-known open data landscape, which still, 12 years later, [ranks second place amongst EU-27 countries](https://data.europa.eu/en/publications/datastories/open-data-maturity-europe-2023) for the openness of ‘[high-value datasets](https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/news/commission-defines-high-value-datasets-be-made-available-re-use)’ \- public sector datasets that have significant benefits for society, the environment and the economy. 

BlindSquare uses open data from around the world. This includes the use of [OpenStreetMap](https://www.openstreetmap.org/) and [Foursquare](https://foursquare.com/): with the former, Blindsquare can identify roads, crossings, stairways, and other points of interest, while with the latter, the app can tell users about the restaurants and businesses around them.

Also, in most of the countries and cities in which it operates, Blindsquare integrates real-time open data on public transport including bus and railway timetables and communications regarding delays and cancellations. This functionality is only available because of easy accessibility to public transport data APIs, like the [New Zealand Transport Agency Traffic and Travel API](https://www.nzta.govt.nz/traffic-and-travel-information/use-our-data/), [the MetroVancouver TransLink API](https://www.translink.ca/about-us/doing-business-with-translink/app-developer-resources), and the [Transport for London API](https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/open-data-users/).

## Looking forward  
The technological infrastructure behind the scenes of the BlindSquare app is designed as simply as possible, making it a useful starting point for the developers’ plans for the future. For example, the general functionality of the app means that, alongside the continued growth of OpenStreetMap, BlindSquare will soon be able to support users in national parks by giving them directions, information about obstacles in front of them, and facts about the points of interest near them, at the shake of their phone. 

Geospatial algorithms and AI may also be able to enhance the experience of using BlindSquare by customising the voice assistance the app provides according to location or personal choice. For instance, a wheelchair user might need more information than a non-wheelchair user regarding pavement widths or surface characteristics, and could ask BlindSquare, via an AI agent, for this information in as much detail as possible. Likewise, a user with an affinity for art, music, or cultural history could ask for that sort of information about their surroundings, which might involve reliance on an LLM.

When it comes to the future, though, the BlindSquare team makes it clear that they put their users first: all design choices are made at the request of, or tested by, a committed user base. This is a complex task for a small team, but Blindsquare nonetheless carries on improving the experience for people with visual impairments around the world by innovating with open data.